--
title: 'The WRSPM model'
published: false
description: a model to study the complete environment where your software lives.
tags: 'wrspm, model, world, requirements, specifications, program, machine'
cover_image: ./assets/TBD
---

Have you ever wonder what role your software holds regarding the outer world?

There is a complete sotfware engineering speciality that tries to answer that question: Requirements Engineering (RE, for further references). 
From early stages of computer cience, we have had RE. But it is a discipline that didn't have its major theory development until mid-to-late '90s.

We can found the first references to RE in the Waterfall model, from its first comments from Herbert Benington, to the formal model of Winston Royce, in 1970.
But even with those mentions, requirements engineering was consider just a stage of the development process, but not a discipline by itself.

Nowadays, _probably_ the most extended model (as working framework), is the one that convoke us today: the WRSPM, from Michael Jackson.
So, let's have a quick review on the model, its inherent features, how have we reached this moment in theory and, perhaps, the problems with the model.

## Background:

- 1995: The Four Variable Model (Functional Documents for computer systems, D. Parnas - J. Madey, 1995)
- 1995: The World and the Machine (M Jackson, 1995).

## WRSPM proposal
Back in 1995, Michael Jackson publshed "Software Requirements & Specifications: A Lexicon of Practice, Principles and Predjudices", where he propossed a model to study the software to be developed and its relations with its environment; from the machine it will be implemented to the real world, through the requirements and specifications. This model was named WRSPM and it's been present in software development since then.

## Description of the model

WRSPM is the acronym for the components of the model: World, Requirements, Specifications, Program and Machine. General idea of model is to set their relative positions, study how they interact between each other and what are their different responsabilities.

### Components
World: refers to domain level knowledge and actions.
Requirements: bussines level topic 
Specifications:
Program:
Machine:

### Responsabilities
Those components live in two different spaces: environment and system WRS and SPM, where S acts as a bridge between the two of them.

### Visibility

Environment hidden (eh):
Environment visibility (ev):
System visibility (sv):
System hidden (sh):

* Evolution trough the time

- Expanded 2000: A Reference Model for Requirements and Specifications

* Aplications

- 2010: An Approach of Requirements Tracing in Formal Refinement

* criticisms

- 2020: A Reference Model For Hierarchical Requirements
