---
title: How to use databases in the Docker world
published: true
description: Run DB engines locally on our machine without installing them by using Docker containers.
tags: 'docker, database, mongodb, postgres'
cover_image: ./assets/docker-databases-cover.jpg
id: 1059901
---

We can run DB engines locally on our machine without installing them by using Docker containers.

💡 Remember that the container's data is removed with the container itself, so, we're going to store the DB data into a specific [Docker volume](https://docs.docker.com/storage/volumes/) (`--volume`) to keep it in time.

## MongoDB

We can start a MongoDB instance with this simple command:

```bash
docker run --detach --name mongo \
  --publish 27017:27017 \
  --volume mongo:/data/db \
  mongo
```

This starts a Docker container that runs the `mongod` process and listens the default MongoDB port `27017`. By default MongoDB uses the `test` database and only accepts connections from `localhost` without authentication.

### The Docker run command

Let's explain the `docker run` arguments:

1. `--detach` runs the container in background, like a service.
2. `--name` assigns a specific name to the created container.
3. `--publish` forwards a specific port in `localhost` to the given container.
4. `--volume` creates or reuse a volume and attach it to the given container in the specified path.

By default MongoDB uses the `/data/db` directory to store the databases (remember to mount a Docker volume in that path).

### A MongoDB root user

You can specify a `root` user to the DB adding the following environment variables to your the container

```bash
docker run --detach --name mongo \
  -env MONGO_INITDB_ROOT_USERNAME=mongoadmin \
  --env MONGO_INITDB_ROOT_PASSWORD=secret \
  --publish 27017:27017 \
  --volume mongo:/data/db \
  mongo
```

For more variables check the `mongo` image page in [Docker hub](https://hub.docker.com/_/mongo).

### Using the MongoDB shell

You can connect to your DB via terminal by using the `mongosh` command in the same container.

```bash
docker exec -it mongo mongosh
```

Use `--username` and `--password` if those values are required.

### How to update the engine

We can update a DB instance easily if we have previously stored the DB data in a Docker volume ‼️. This is important, otherwise we'll lose data.

1. Pull the latest MongoDB image

    ```bash
    docker pull mongo
    ```

1. First stop and remove the Docker container

    ```bash
    docker stop mongo
    docker rm mongo
    ```

1. Recreate the container with the same given arguments, remember to include the `--env` variables.

    ```bash
    docker run --detach --name mongo \
      --publish 27017:27017 \
      --volume mongo:/data/db \
      mongo
    ```

It's done! your database is now up to date. 🙌

## PostgreSQL

For Posgres remember to set the root user password.

```bash
docker run --detach --name pg \
  --env POSTGRES_PASSWORD=secret \
  --volume pgdata:/var/lib/postgresql/data \
  --publish 5432:5432 \
  postgres
```

By default the username is `postgres` but you can override that value using the `POSTGRES_USER` variable.

For more variables check the [Docker Hub](https://hub.docker.com/_/postgres) page.

### Connecting via terminal

You can connect via terminal using the same container with the correct username instead of installing the client on your machine.

```bash
docker exec -it pg psql --username=postgres
```

The password is not required to connections from the same host.

## MySQL

MySQL follows the Postgres rules with

```bash
docker run --detach --name mysql \
  --env MYSQL_ROOT_PASSWORD=secret \
  --volume mysql:/var/lib/mysql \
  --publish 3306:3306 \
  mysql
```

More information in [Docker hub](https://hub.docker.com/_/mysql).

### Connecting via terminal

```bash
docker exec -it mysql mysql -p
```

The client will prompt for the root password.

## Microsoft SQL Server

Microsoft needs that you declare that you have a license to the SQL Server that you want to use with `ACCEPT_EULA=Y`. 🙄

```bash
docker run --name mssql \
  --env ACCEPT_EULA=Y \
  --env 'SA_PASSWORD=yourStrong(!)Password' \
  --volume mssql:/var/opt/mssql \
  --publish 1433:1433 \
  mcr.microsoft.com/mssql/server
```

Also, the SA password has stronger constraints than the other engines.

### SQL Server editions

By default the Developer edition is the SQL Server edition used by this Docker image. If you need a SQL Express edition you should use `MSSQL_PID=Express`.

```bash
docker run --name mssql \
  --env ACCEPT_EULA=Y \
  --env MSSQL_PID=Express \
  --env 'SA_PASSWORD=yourStrong(!)Password' \
  --volume mssql:/var/opt/mssql \
  --publish 1433:1433 \
  mcr.microsoft.com/mssql/server
```

More information about SQL server editions in [Docker hub](https://hub.docker.com/_/microsoft-mssql-server).

### Connecting via terminal

The `sqlcmd` command is not in `PATH`, so you should use the absolute path to execute it inside the container.

```bash
docker exec -it mssql /opt/mssql-tools/bin/sqlcmd -U sa -P 'yourStrong(!)Password'
```

## Conclusion

Now, we know how to handle MongoDB and some SQL engines using Docker containers, using volumes to store the data.

We can connect to the database terminal using the container itself, and we must use Docker volume to prevent data loss.
