---
title: Using Git with two or more users
published: true
description: How to use Git with several SSH keys in the same machine.
tags: 'git, ssh, github, security'
cover_image: ./assets/git-multi-users.jpg
id: 1124963
---

Sometimes we need to use more than one Git user in the same machine. This is simple to configure but we need to know a few things before using this feature.

## Creating an additional SSH key

By default the SSH key is generated in the `~/.ssh/` directory, and it's called `id_rsa` or `id_ed25519`, depending on the signature type. To create a key with a specific filename we can use the following command

```bash
ssh-keygen -f filename -t ed25519 -C 'machine_name'
```

💡 If you're going to use this key for a specific organization, it's very useful to use the format `id_orgname` for the filename.

The comment specified by using the `-C` argument should be something useful to know why this key was created 🤔. It could be the name of the machine that uses this SSH key or any notation that helps you. This comment is only visible by you.

### Can we use the same key for all the users?

It depends. The source code hostings, like GitHub, associate the SSH key to a specific user of the platform to know which user is pushing code to a Git repository, check the access, etc. If your company doesn’t use Github, con can also use the same key for a personal email in Github and your company’s email in GitLab.

## Cloning a repository with a specific SSH key

The `git clone` command uses the SSH protocol to connect to the Git hosting, and the SSH program in your machine uses the default key (usually located at `~/.ssh/id_ed25519`) for authentication. You should use a custom SSH command to clone the repository using this:

 ```bash
git clone --config core.sshCommand="ssh -i path/to/private_ssh_key" git@github.com:orgname/repo.git
```

🧠 Remember that, if the key name ends with `.pub`, e.g. `id_orgname.pub`, then that is the public key. You should use the key file without this extension because that's your private key.

If you want to use a different email address, configure it with the following commands:

```bash
git config user.name "John Doe"
git config user.email john@example.com
```

💡 Use the `--global` argument to set default settings for all the Git repositories in the machine. Otherwise the `git config` command only sets configuration values for the repository in the current directory.

## Changing the key to an already cloned repository

If you've cloned a Git repository but you need to use a new SSH key to push code, you can use this command to set a new SSH command:

```bash
git config core.sshCommand "ssh -i path/to/private_ssh_key"
```

## Extra SSH tips

Maybe your company has their Git repositories in a custom port 🙈 (`22` is the default port for SSH), you need to clone these repositories with the following option:

```bash
git clone --config core.sshCommand="ssh -p 2222" git@git.example.com:path/to/repo.git
```

## Conclusion

You can use specific Git configurations for each repository, like commit author's information or specific command aliases.

The variations for the SSH commands to connect to a repository using the SSH protocol can be changed anytime.
