---
title: Querying installed packages with npm query
published: true
description: Check your installed dependencies using CSS selectors format.
tags: 'javascript, webdev, node, react'
cover_image: ./assets/npm-query-cover.jpg
id: 1209907
---

Do you know if you have any package that makes use of `postinstall` scripts? Do you have a package installed twice? Since version 8.18.0 we can use [`npm query`](https://docs.npmjs.com/cli/v8/commands/npm-query) to find packages in the `node_modules` directory matching a specific query.
This is helpful in identifying possible issues and fixing them.

## Why is a postinstall script important?

The `postinstall` script allows a package to run code when it's installed and this could be used in a malicious way. The npm security team receives [reports of malware](https://docs.npmjs.com/reporting-malware-in-an-npm-package) in the registry and works to keep the ecosystem safe, but did you check which dependencies are running in `postinstall` scripts? Do you trust them?

To uninstall all dependencies with a `postinstall` script use the following command:

```bash
npm query ":attr(scripts, [postinstall])" | jq 'map(.name) | join("\n")' -r | xargs -I {} npm uninstall {}
```

ðŸ’¡ The `jq` program is essential to filter data in JSON format.

## Finding duplicate packages

Sometimes we find some errors on the DevTools' console when React or Angular is being loaded twice on our website. This happens when a dependency is incompatible with the [semver](https://semver.org) of the same package declared on our `package.json`. E.g. We declared `react@^18.2.0` in our `package.json` and some dependency has `react@^16.8.0 || ^17.0.0` as dependency in their own `package.json`.

We can find every installed copy of a specific package using:

```bash
npm query '#react'
```

Or, if we're looking for old versions of React

```bash
npm query '#react:semver(<18.0.0)'
```

ðŸ§  Remember that the selectors for `npm query` follow the [CSS selectors format](https://www.w3schools.com/cssref/css_selectors.asp).

## Check the dependency licenses

Perhaps you can't use code with a specific license in your app. You can check the variety of licenses installed in your `node_modules` printing a dedupe list with this command:

```bash
npm query '*' | jq '.[] | select(.license | type == "string") | .license' -r | sort | uniq
```

ðŸŽ Some packages, like `rimraf`, declare an object in the license field of the `package.json`, so you can use this example for these:

```bash
npm query '*' | jq '.[] | select(.license | type == "object") | .license'
# or using attr selector
npm query ':attr(license, [url])' | jq 'map(.license)'
```

Then you can look up packages with specific licenses, or without a license.

```bash
npm query '[license=MIT], [license=ISC], [license=]'
```

## Other usages

You can create the query that matches your needs, but we can review a few additional scenarios.

### Dependencies from Git

You can install dependencies from Git branches or tags instead of the _npm registry_ and then you can check which of them are installed in your project.

```bash
npm query ':type(git)'
```

Who needs these packages? The `npm why` command can tell us:

```bash
npm query ":type(git)" | jq 'map(.name) | join("\n")' -r | xargs -I {} npm why {}
```

### The peerDependencies

If you run your app and you get an error for a missing dependency, check if a peer dependency of your direct dependencies is required. Maybe you should add it in your `package.json` file.

```bash
npm query ':root > * > .peer' | jq 'map(.name)'
```

ðŸ“š You could have example pages for [`npm-query`](https://github.com/tldr-pages/tldr/blob/main/pages/common/npm-query.md) and [`jq`](https://github.com/tldr-pages/tldr/blob/main/pages/common/jq.md) in your terminal for quick usage thanks to the [tldr-pages](https://github.com/tldr-pages/tldr) open source project.

## Conclusion

Using `npm query` in conjunction with `jq` you can check some constraints in your dependencies to make sure you don't have duplicate dependencies, or licenses that are incompatible with your app or company's policy.

I hope this helps you to resolve your issues with npm packages. Tell me in the comments which queries you found useful.
