---
title: 'Running graphic apps in Docker: AWS WorkSpaces'
published: true
description: 'How to run GUI apps using X.Org and Docker in Linux or Windows'
tags: 'tutorial, docker, aws, security'
cover_image: ./assets/gui-apps-docker-cover.jpg
id: 1253471
---

As a Linux user, I need to connect to an Amazon WorkSpace but the client app can only be run in specific old, but maintained, versions of Ubuntu. I tried with the latest Ubuntu version but it didn't work, so I've created a virtual machine with Ubuntu Focal 20.04 but this setup used 14GB of disk space 😵 only to open a window application. This didn't make any sense. Also this included issues when sharing the clipboard from the host to the VM and then to the virtual desktop hosted in Amazon. 🙄
Then, I remembered that we can run graphic applications using Docker. Let's see how to connect a container to the [X Window System](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/X_Window_System) of the host.

> Note: Treating option '--ncp-ciphers' as  '--data-ciphers' (renamed in OpenVPN 2.5).
> WARNING: Compression for receiving enabled. Compression has been used in the past to break encryption. Sent packets are not compressed unless "allow-compression yes" is also set.
> --cipher is not set. Previous OpenVPN version defaulted to BF-CBC as fallback when cipher negotiation failed in this case. If you need this fallback please add '--data-ciphers-fallback BF-CBC' to your configuration and/or add BF-CBC to --data-ciphers.
> Unsupported cipher in --data-ciphers: BF-CBC
> Options error: NCP cipher list contains unsupported ciphers or is too long.
> Use --help for more information.

## Creating the Docker image

The following Dockerfile build the image using Ubuntu Focal 20.04, and install the Amazon WorkSpace client:

```Dockerfile
FROM ubuntu:focal

ENV DEBIAN_FRONTEND=noninteractive

RUN apt update && \
  apt install -y libusb-1.0-0 wget xauth && \
  wget -q -O - https://workspaces-client-linux-public-key.s3-us-west-2.amazonaws.com/ADB332E7.asc | apt-key add - && \
  echo "deb [arch=amd64] https://d3nt0h4h6pmmc4.cloudfront.net/ubuntu focal main" > /etc/apt/sources.list.d/amazon-workspaces-clients.list && \
  apt remove -y wget && \
  apt update && \
  apt install -y workspacesclient && \
  touch /root/.Xauthority && \
  rm -rf /var/lib/apt/lists/*
```

💡 `libusb-1.0-0` is a dependency of Amazon WorkSpaces.

The `DEBIAN_FRONTEND=noninteractive` environment is used to skip the Ubuntu’s prompt asking for our time zone.

Build the image with the following command:

```bash
docker build -t workspace .
```

The Docker image size is 1.2GB, a reduction of 91% in comparison to the 14GB of the virtual machine.

## Starting the container

Now, we can run the container!

```bash
docker run --name ws --network=host -e DISPLAY -v /tmp/.X11-unix -it workspace
```

We need to share the `.X11-unix/` directory where the connection [socket](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unix_domain_socket) is located, and `DISPLAY` is the name of the display of the host.

The `--network=host` argument makes the container use the same network of the host, and the container does not get its own IP address. This avoids the container being network isolated. 🪛

## Starting the GUI application

Before starting the app we must authenticate the X Window System of the container with the host.

Get the authorization entry of the host using the `xauth` command:

```bash
xauth list
```

Copy the output of the command and run this in the container (replacing the placeholders with the values from the clipboard):

```bash
xauth add <display_name> <protocol_name> <hex_key>
```

Now you are able to start GUI applications inside the container! 🎉

```bash
/opt/workspacesclient/workspacesclient
```

## Alternative: use VNC instead of X11

We need to make a few changes to run a VNC server in the container:

```Dockerfile
FROM ubuntu:focal

ENV DEBIAN_FRONTEND=noninteractive

RUN apt update && \
  apt install -y libusb-1.0-0 gpg wget x11vnc xvfb && \
  wget -q -O - https://workspaces-client-linux-public-key.s3-us-west-2.amazonaws.com/ADB332E7.asc | apt-key add - && \
  echo "deb [arch=amd64] https://d3nt0h4h6pmmc4.cloudfront.net/ubuntu focal main" > /etc/apt/sources.list.d/amazon-workspaces-clients.list && \
  apt remove -y wget && \
  apt update && \
  apt install -y workspacesclient && \
  rm -rf /var/lib/apt/lists/*

RUN echo "exec /opt/workspacesclient/workspacesclient" > ~/.xinitrc && \
  chmod +x ~/.xinitrc

CMD ["x11vnc", "-create", "-forever"]
```

The `x11vnc` command will start an X11 session in the container launching the application specified in the `~/.xinitrc` file.

```bash
docker build -t workspace .
```

Then, we can run the container

```bash
docker run --name ws -it workspace
```

But how can we know the IP address of the container? Just check it with the following command:

```bash
docker inspect --format='{{range .NetworkSettings.Networks}}{{.IPAddress}}{{end}}' ws
```

Now you can connect to the VNC server. 🔌

## Conclusion

We can run graphic applications that work in specific Linux distros using Docker 🐋, by connecting directly to our X Window System. This uses less memory and disk space than a VM.

You can get the same in Windows as the host using [Xming](https://sourceforge.net/projects/xming/).

`xauth` could be used in conjunction with SSH to run remote GUI apps 😉 in our local, but that's for another post.

Alternatively, you can start a VNC server in a container allowing more flexibility either if you use macOS, or if you can't connect using X11 because you're using [Wayland](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wayland_(display_server_protocol)). But this doesn't feel like a native window on your OS.
