---
title: 'Node.js v20: .env files, import modules, and Permission Model'
published: true
description: We can find new amazing features in this major release
tags: 'javascript, node, webdev, programming'
cover_image: ./assets/nodejs-v20.png
id: 1949841
date: '2024-08-09T12:23:27Z'
---

Node.js v20.6 was released with amazing new features that are part of the LTS versions from October 24th, 2023. Let's see!

## The INI configuration files

Say goodbye to the `dotenv` package, now Node.js can load [environment variables](https://nodejs.org/docs/latest/api/cli.html#--env-fileconfig) from a `.env` file.

```bash
node --env-file path/to/.env index.js
```

💡 The path to the [INI file](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/INI_file) is required because Node.js didn't choose a default name for the INI file.

🧠 If the INI file doesn't exist the `node` process didn't fail, just start running without the environment variables.

### Loading `NODE_OPTIONS`

You can load Node.js' [specific environment variables](https://nodejs.org/docs/latest/api/cli.html#environment-variables) (like `NODE_OPTIONS`) using an INI configuration file like the following example:

```text
NODE_NO_WARNINGS=1
NODE_OPTIONS="--experimental-permission --allow-fs-read=*"
TZ=Pacific/Honolulu
UV_THREADPOOL_SIZE=5
```

You can use this with the same method:

```bash
node --env-file .env index.js
```

## Preload ES modules

Preload ES modules at startup using the `--import` flag, the module will be loaded before any application code runs, even the entry point.

```bash
node --import path/to/file.js index.js
```

This flag is similar to the well known `--require` flag used to load CommonJS modules.

💡 Modules preloaded with --require will run before modules preloaded with --import.

## Permission Model

We have a new mechanism to restrict access to specific resources during the execution of a Node.js process called [Permission Model](https://nodejs.org/docs/latest/api/permissions.html#permission-model). The API exists behind a flag [`--experimental-permission`](https://nodejs.org/docs/latest/api/cli.html#--experimental-permission) which, when enabled, will restrict access to all resources not explicitly allowed.

### File System permissions

The [`--allow-fs-read`](https://nodejs.org/docs/latest/api/cli.html#--allow-fs-read) flag allows all `FileSystemRead` operations using `*`, or to specific paths using absolute routes.

```bash
node --experimental-permission --allow-fs-read=* index.js
```

To only allow access to specific paths you should use absolute routes

```bash
node --experimental-permission --allow-fs-read=/path/to/index.js --allow-fs-read=/path/to/directory index.js
```

🧠 The initializer module also needs to be allowed. Otherwise `index.js` file cannot be loaded by the Node.js process itself.

💡 You can use `.` to allow access to the working directory, but you can't use it to specify the path to a file (e.g. `./index.js`).

```bash
node --experimental-permission --allow-fs-read=. index.js
```

The [`--allow-fs-write`](https://nodejs.org/docs/latest/api/cli.html#--allow-fs-write) flag allows access to specific paths or the whole file system using `*`.

```bash
node --experimental-permission --allow-fs-read=. --allow-fs-write=/tmp/ index.js
```

### Child Process

When the Permission Model is enabled, the process will not be able to spawn any child process by default, you should use the [--allow-child-process](https://nodejs.org/docs/latest/api/cli.html#--allow-child-process) to allow this operation. Let's use the following code for the `index.js`.

```javascript
const childProcess = require('node:child_process');
childProcess.spawn('node', ['-e', 'require("fs").writeFileSync("./new-file.txt", "Hello, World!")']);
```

To run this snippet with the Permission Model enabled you should execute `index.js` using the following command:

```bash
node --experimental-permission --allow-fs-read . --allow-child-process index.js
```

🧠 The child process doesn't inherit the Permission Model by default, that's why the `new-file.txt` is created successfully.

### More options

You can check the [--allow-worker](https://nodejs.org/docs/latest/api/cli.html#--allow-worker) flag if you want to create Worker Threads under this Permission Model and [--allow-wasi](https://nodejs.org/docs/latest/api/cli.html#--allow-wasi) to allow the creation of WASI instances

## Conclusion

We have a lot of new tools to load environment variables for our application, a method to import preload ES modules required in our code and a new Permission Model to increase the security of our systems.

Stay tuned to the [Node.js' blog](https://nodejs.org/en/blog), this team is adding awesome features in every version! We have initial TypeScript support and a Network Inspection using the DevTools in [v22.6.0](https://github.com/nodejs/node/releases/tag/v22.6.0).
