---
title: Rewriting the history with Git rebase
published: true
description: How to squash commits and keep your branch up-to-date using git rebase 
tags: 'git, bash, productivity, tooling'
cover_image: ./assets/git-rebase.jpg
id: 1949937
---

As when we work in a new feature or bug fix it is recommended to keep our branch up-to-date with the target branch (`main`, `development`, etc.), we can use the [`git rebase`](https://git-scm.com/docs/git-rebase) command instead of `git merge` in order to keep our Git history clean.

The `git rebase` command reapplies our commits on top of the target branch, rewriting the Git history. This is not recommended on shared branches (like `main`) because it causes divergence (and therefore the need of conflict solving) and panic on your teammates 😬 since it is sometimes hard to resolve.

## The basics

To be clear about how `git rebase` works we're going to use the simplest example: you have 3 commits in your feature branch and you want to get the latest changes from `main`. To do so you can simply run the following command:

```bash
git rebase main
```

If you're lucky to get no conflicts then you'll have a new Git history with your 3 commits on the top of the `main` branch and you just need to override (`--force`) the remote branch with your new history.

```bash
git push --force origin feature/abc
```

But what if we have conflicts? Well, you're reapplying 3 commits so any of these could bring conflicts. Just resolve conflicts as always and then continue rebasing:

```bash
git add .
git rebase --continue
```

Let's check a more dynamic scenario.

## Squashing commits interactively

If you made several commits while you were preparing your work but now you want to combine your commits into one before creating the pull request then you can rebase against your target branch using the `--interactive` argument `git rebase --interactive main`. A `git-rebase-todo` file will be open in the default editor (`nano`, `vim`, etc.) where you can edit the commands that Git will execute to reapply your commits. Let's check this example:

```text
pick 0680aa7 fix grid responsiveness
fixup 68ab202 fix unit tests
exec npm test
reword 76d14ac fix grid layout for iOS
exec npm test
```

🧠 The`git-rebase-todo` file is a sequence of commands to be executed by Git, and you can run any shell command using the `exec` command.

The `pick` is used to take a commit as-is. The commit message is displayed by Git only to help you to identify what changes are there (Git will ignore if you edit it).

Then we have the `fixup` command, which combines a specific commit into the previous one without changing the commit message.

If the `npm test` fails you will see the following message:

```text
warning: execution failed: npm test
You can fix the problem, and then run

  git rebase --continue
```

Sad time when you need to fix the tests 😢. Before continuing the rebase you will need to commit these changes creating a new commit; or integrating there in the latest one using the classic [`git commit --amend`](https://git-scm.com/docs/git-commit#Documentation/git-commit.txt---amend).

```bash
git add .
git commit --amend
git rebase --continue
```

The `reword` command that we put into the `git-rebase-todo` file will open your default editor (e.g. nano) with the current commit message for `76d14ac`. Edit it and save to continue.

💡 The `git rebase` reapplies commits, you can do this without needing a target branch (`main`): just indicate how many commits you want to reapply for the current branch (`HEAD`). For our example of 3 latest commits:

```bash
git rebase --interactive HEAD~3
```

🧠 Remember that `HEAD` is a pointer to either your current branch or your current commit when you're in a **detached HEAD** (meaning you are located in a commit not associated with any branch).

And, this is the usage of `git rebase --interactive` 🎉. Let's continue with the `git rebase --exec`.

Do you either prefer `rebase` or `merge` to keep your branch up to date? 👇 Let me know in the comments.

## Conclusion

You can manipulate the commits in a useful way using `git rebase`, maybe just using it to keep your work up to date using a linear history, optionally combining your editions into one commit using `fixup`.

I hope this guide helps you understand more about Git and how to manipulate your commits safely because you can always `git rebase --abort` if the things aren't going how is planned.

In the following post of this series of `git rebase` we're going to see how to run tests for the rebased commits automatically. 😬
