---
title: Git rebase exec to validate every commit
published: true
description: How to run unit tests and build tools for every commit when you rebase
tags: 'git, bash, productivity, tooling'
cover_image: ./assets/git-rebase-exec.png
id: 1949938
---

In the previous post we checked out how the `git rebase` works and how to use the `--interactive` mode to keep your topic branch up-to-date with the target (e.g. `main`). We also talked about how to use the `exec` command into the `git-rebase-todo` file to run custom commands for the rebased commits.

Now, let's check how to use`exec` in a short way.

## Exec, exec, exec

If you need to run the build, tests, or any format tool while rebasing because you must guarantee that every commit is valid, you can speed things up using the `git rebase --exec` command.

```bash
git rebase main --exec "npm test" --exec "npm run build"
```

If the command fails 😩 you will need to fix your code and then resume the rebase with `git rebase --continue`.

```bash
git add .
git commit --amend
git rebase --continue
```

### Reschedule failed exec

If an `exec` command exits with a failure, your rebase will return the shell control to you. The `git rebase --continue` command will resume the execution but it won't run the failed `exec` again. To avoid this you can use [`--reschedule-failed-exec`](https://git-scm.com/docs/git-rebase#Documentation/git-rebase.txt---reschedule-failed-exec).

```bash
git rebase main --exec "npm test" --exec "npm run build" --reschedule-failed-exec
```

You can make this the default behavior by using the [rebase.rescheduleFailedExec](https://git-scm.com/docs/git-rebase#Documentation/git-rebase.txt-rebaserescheduleFailedExec) setting:

```bash
git config --global rebase.rescheduleFailedExec true
```

To turn this off when the `rescheduleFailedExec` is globally `true` you should use the `--no-reschedule-failed-exe` flag:

```bash
git rebase main --exec "npm test" --no-reschedule-failed-exec
```

Or, you can unset this globally:

```bash
git rebase --global --unset rebase.rescheduleFailedExec
```

## Conclusion

If your commits will live on your Git repository forever (e.g. inside the `main` branch) without being squashed (combined into one) it's useful to guarantee the validity of each commit individually. Git provides this `exec` mechanism to automate this process.

How often do you check the tests and build for every commit of your created pull request? 😉

In the next chapter we're going to see how to split the commits 🔪 using `git rebase` too.
