---
title: A step-by-step guide to splitting commits using Git rebase
published: true
description: Learn why and how to split commits to keep your Git history clean and organized. Whether you're backporting hotfixes or simply aiming for more readable commit history, this step-by-step guide has got you covered.
tags: 'git, bash, productivity, tooling'
cover_image: ./assets/git-rebase-edit.png
id: 2015782
---

In the previous posts we checked how to use the [`git rebase --interactive`](https://git-scm.com/docs/git-rebase#Documentation/git-rebase.txt---interactive) and how to squash your commits using the `fixup` command in the `git-rebase-todo` file.

Now, we're going to see how to split commits using the terminal. But why split a commit? Well, this is a way to organize your work, maybe you need to rearrange your changes to make the backport of hotfixes to old released versions easier, probably using `git cherry-pick`. Let's see!

## Splitting commits

You can use `git rebase` to split your commits. There are several alternatives to do it and we're going to check the `git rebase --interactive` way. You can use `git rebase --interactive main` to reapply all your new commits to the top of the `main` branch, or just `git rebase --interactive HEAD~2` to apply the latest 2 commits.

```text
pick 0680aa7 fix header responsiveness
exec npm test
edit 68ab202 fix grid responsiveness and upgrade bootstrap
exec npm test
break
```

💡 You can `pick` the rebased commits in any order! but this can cause Git conflicts 😞. Also you can `pick` commits from other branches like [`git cherry-pick`](https://git-scm.com/docs/git-cherry-pick).

Well, Git will `pick` the commit `0680aa7` as-is and run `npm test` and if the command exists successfully then Git will pick the commit `68ab202` and break returning the control of the shell to you allowing to `edit` this last commit. Let's see how to edit the last commit.

🧠 To make it clear: `edit` takes the changes from a specific commit without committing it, you are allowed to edit theses changes and then you must commit it manually using the `git commit` command.

First, undo it keeping all the changes in the working tree using the following command:

```bash
git reset HEAD^
```

Now, you are able to make any edition to your code. Then you can use `git add` to add the changes to the index to commit it in parts splitting the original commit. As the following example shows:

```bash
git add package.json package-lock.json
git commit -m 'upgrade bootstrap'
git add .
git commit -m 'fix grid responsiveness'
git rebase --continue
```

Git will continue running the second `exec` command that makes an `npm test`, if this fails you need to fix your code, otherwise Git will continue with the `break` command returning the control of the shell to you again. Here you are able to run your application, make the final checks, etc.

If you like the changes just run `git rebase --continue` to finish the rebase, or `git rebase --abort` if you want to cancel all these changes. 👀

Let me know in the comments 👇 what other method you prefer to split or edit commits.

## Conclusion

Remember that it's useful to keep your commits small and semantic, making atomic changes make it easier to check where a crazy bug was introduced. Split commits is an easy to use tool and helps you to keep your Git history more readable. Remember, more commits is not an issue if they are small and semantic.

In the next post we're going to check the `git rebase --force-rebase` command. See ya!
